>> The Saskatchewan Hospital
near the small prairie town
of Weyburn holds a remarkable
yet little-known story.
Long abandoned,
these rooms and halls
were witness to a project
far ahead of its time.
Beginning in 1952, cutting-edge
psychiatric research
used LSD to unlock the mysteries
of human consciousness.
LSD promised an
entirely new approach
to understanding the mind, an
inward passage to our truer
and richer selves.
But a decade later,
in the 1960s,
LSD was used to fuel
a cultural revolution,
resulting in one of the
most controversial periods
in Canadian history.
At the center of the
storm were three doctors.
Abram Hoffer, a native
of Saskatchewan,
gained an international
reputation
as Canada's pre-eminent
LSD researcher.
>> After taking LSD, I knew--
quotation marks-- what it was
like to have been mentally ill.
>> Humphry Osmond, a
freethinking psychiatrist,
became a cult figure in
the world of psychedelics.
>> For myself, these experiences
have been most strange,
most awesome, and
in their own way,
amongst the most
beautiful in my life.
>> And Duncan Blewett, a
charismatic psychologist,
was an early advocate for
the personal use of LSD.
>> The government makes $11
million a year in Saskatchewan
off liquor.
They could double that off LSD
without any trouble at all.
>> Innovative work with
LSD put Hoffer, Osmond,
and Blewett at the forefront
of a radical new science.
But fear and hostility
to psychedelic drugs
made them victims of
social and political forces
beyond their control.
From the depths of
the human psyche
to the center of
political turmoil,
this is this strange true trip
of the psychedelic pioneers.
In 1920, when the Saskatchewan
Hospital was built,
a debilitating disease called
schizophrenia had claimed
millions of victims worldwide.
Schizophrenics live
in a world where
thought patterns, emotions,
and perceptions constantly
shift, where nothing is stable.
They filled hospital
wards beyond capacity,
and seemed to be untreatable.
In 1950, in London, England,
a young psychiatrist
named Humphry Osmond was
studying schizophrenia.
With a creativity that
would define his career,
Osmond used a
radical new approach.
He began experimenting
with mescaline,
one of a group of
hallucinogenic drugs
that alter human perception.
>> What happens, in fact,
is that you do see the world
in a different sort of way--
totally different.
And you get the
picture of a world
as one imagines the great
artists can sometimes see,
a world of tremendously
color, of great significance,
of great beauty, but also
at times of great terror.
>> Osmond was convinced his
mescaline-induced experience
was similar to the inner
world of the schizophrenic.
He shocked the medical
community by suggesting
that schizophrenia might be
a form of self-intoxication
caused by the body
mistakenly producing
its own hallucinogenic
compounds.
This implied an entirely new
line of psychiatric research.
When his ideas were rejected
by the English medical
establishment, Osmond
decided to leave London.
In 1951, Osmond arrived at
the Saskatchewan Hospital
in Weyburn and was soon
promoted to superintendent,
the top position.
At the University
Hospital in Saskatoon,
Osmond was pleased to
discover a research
study focused on schizophrenia.
The study was headed by Abram
Hoffer, a gifted researcher
with the unusual
combination of degrees
in biochemistry and psychiatry.
Hoffer and Osmond
quickly joined forces.
With Hoffer's tenacity
and Osmond's creativity,
they were a remarkable
combination.
>> You think of 1,000 ideas and
throw away all the bad ones.
And I think that
was Humphry Osmond.
That was one of the
amazing thing about it.
He was so brilliant, and
he was a marvelous writer.
Any writing skills I have
now-- and I have a few,
not that many--
I picked it up by
working with Dr. Osmond.
>> In the early 1950s when
Humphry Osmond arrived,
the Saskatchewan Hospital,
overcrowded and filthy,
was one of the worst
in North America.
But there was political
will to improve conditions.
>> The government was the CCF
government under Tommy Douglas,
who was a brilliant leader.
And he had spent
three months working
as an intern at the
Saskatchewan Hospital in Weyburn
so he knew pretty well
what was going on there.
And he decided that he'd
have to bring health back
to some kind of modernity.
>> Tommy Douglas was premier of
the first socialist government
in North America, a government
known for innovation
and sweeping social change.
Under Douglas, Hoffer and
Osmond were protected and given
remarkable freedom.
Osmond used the opportunity to
gather from around the world
every known
hallucinogenic substance.
With the goal of finding
a cure for schizophrenia
and with considerable
courage, Osmond
evaluated the properties
of these substances
by testing them on himself.
Osmond was also a
brilliant administrator.
In just five years, he
transformed the Saskatchewan
Hospital.
It became recognized
as a world leader
in research, serving as a magnet
for mental health professionals
from around the world.
One of those drawn was
an American psychologist,
Robert Sommer.
>> It was a very
liberal environment.
I as a researcher could do
all sorts of things there--
that Humphry became
superintendent, this really--
creative people like
that don't become
hospital superintendents.
And the whole climate
was experimental.
Let's try it.
See what works.
>> It has a peculiar glow.
It is alternatively a
swelling and contracting.
This is most interesting.
>> By 1952, Hoffer and Osmond
had assembled a team to study
schizophrenia.
Expanding on Osmond's
ideas from England,
they based the research on
finding a biochemical cause
for the disease.
This focus contravened
mainstream psychiatry,
then fixed on the belief that
the cause of schizophrenia
was entirely psychological.
Within the body
of schizophrenics,
Hoffer and Osmond looked
for the abnormal production
of compounds that had
hallucinogenic properties.
One of the first
compounds they identified
was a derivative of adrenaline
called adrenochrome.
>> New chemicals allow
us to experience some
of the unbelievably unpleasant
and sometimes quite terrifying
mental agonies of a
schizophrenic patient--
to some extent, to put ourselves
in his shoes for a few hours.
>> Hoffer and Osmond's first
rule in testing compounds was
to do it yourself.
They believed that to fully
understand schizophrenia,
they needed
temporarily to become
schizophrenic themselves.
>> We found that after taking
adrenochrome and adrenolutin,
we were drawn into the
experience much more than with
other psychosis-producing drugs.
We lived the experience more,
like real schizophrenia.
>> But adrenochrome proved
unstable and difficult to work
with.
So Hoffer and Osmond
turned to a new drug
from the same group of
hallucinogens as mescalin.
It had just become available,
and it was called LSD.
LSD was discovered during
the Second World War
at Sandoz, a Swiss
pharmaceutical company.
Chemist Albert Hoffman was
experimenting with ergot,
a fungus that grows on wheat.
On April 16, 1943,
Hoffman accidentally
absorbed a minute
amount of lysurgic acid
diethylamide 25, and took
the first trip on LSD.
One effect of LSD is to disable
neurotransmitters in the brain.
Information arriving from
the senses is filtered,
and the mind fills up
with sensations, memories,
and emotions.
The impact on the
mind is profound,
creating an altered
state of consciousness
totally outside the realm
of ordinary experience.
Reality is transformed.
The world is perceived rich
with meaning and significance.
Hoffer and Osmond obtained
LSD from Sandoz in 1952.
After they had tested
the drug on themselves,
they began working
with normal subjects.
They used LSD as the
psychomimetic, where
for a brief time the subject
entered a drug-induced state
that mimicked psychosis.
They could then test out
methods of treatment,
assuming that if the treatments
affected normal subjects,
they might affect
actual schizophrenics.
>> Already, we have learned
enough to feel that we are no
longer guessing, no longer
depending only on sensitivity
to gain access to the
world of our patients.
>> Hoffer and Osmond's
use of LSD in the study
of schizophrenia was a time
when drug therapy was in its
infancy.
In 1953, when their
work was published
in leading medical
journals, they
attracted international
attention.
One of those attracted was
psychologist Duncan Blewett,
who came to Saskatchewan from
the University of Illinois.
>> They had a research project
which said essentially,
we don't know what causes
schizophrenia but we're going
to find out, and we're going
to do something about it,
and it's happening here.
That notion was really
a revolutionary idea.
>> Blewett immediately
understood the tremendous
potential of LSD and in 1954
became part of the Saskatchewan
research group.
Another drawn to the
work of Hoffer and Osmond
was Aldous Huxley, best known
for the futuristic novel "Brave
New World."
Huxley had read about
Osmond's work with mescaline.
In 1953, he invited
Osmond to Los Angeles.
>> He hoped that I'd
give him mescaline,
because he'd been
cleared by his doctor.
So I had no way out, really.
And so as I--
on the second last
day of my visit,
I stood stirring in
the mescaline which
has a strange oily
swirl, and I wondered
if I would be remembered as a
man who'd gone to California
and driven Aldous Huxley mad.
>> Far from inducing madness,
Osmond instead created a high
of historic importance.
Huxley felt mescaline
expanded the limitations
of his nervous system, revealing
the wonders of existence
to a self-centered
and earthbound mind.
The results of the
experience led Huxley in 1954
to write his seminal book,
"The Doors of Perception."
>> In your book about
mescaline recently,
you talked of a valuable state
of heightened perception,
being induced by
drugs, by proper drugs.
Do you think imaginative
writers would benefit by that?
>> I think it would be extremely
good for almost anybody with
the fixed ideas and with a great
certainty about what's what
to take this thing and to
realize that the world he has
constructed is by no
means the only world--
that there are these
extraordinary other types
of universe which we may inhabit
and which we should be very
grateful for
inhabiting, I think.
>> Osmond and Huxley
became close friends.
In 1956, by corresponding
with Huxley from Weyburn,
Osmond coined the
word that would
secure his place in the
history of the counterculture.
>> Aldus suggested
phanerothyme--
"phaneroin," to reveal
and "thumos" for soul.
And he then wrote
this little rhyme--
"To make this mundane
world sublime,
take half a gram
of phanerothyme."
And I thought this
was wonderful word,
but rather too difficult
for most people.
It was a Huxley word.
And so I wrote back to
him, having looked up
in the dictionary the fact that
the word psyche, of course,
was available and so
was deluon, to reveal,
and about half a dozen others.
But I fixed on psychedelic and
wrote back "to fall in Hell
or soar angelic, you'll need
a pinch of psychedelic."
>> From the inner
reaches of his mind,
Humphry Osmond's concept of
psychedelic went out to change
the lives of millions worldwide.
In 1954, LSD research
in Saskatchewan
moved in an entirely
new direction.
It was a study that
involved alcoholics.
>> Alcoholics had been
classified as a character
disorder.
Freud didn't feel that they
were treatable by psychoanalysis
because you couldn't
establish a relationship.
They didn't have
any libido despair.
And so you talk to this
person, but you're making
no emotional impression on him.
>> We knew about AA,
Alcoholics Anonymous.
And one of their
basic principles
was that often you have to hit
bottom before you did well.
Now, the danger
of hitting bottom
is the high mortality rate.
How can we get these guys to
hit bottom without any danger?
So it occurred to me, let's take
these alcoholics in hospital,
give them LSD, give them
a terrible experience,
and when they come
out of it, we'll
tell them if you
keep on drinking,
that's going to happen to you.
We thought we would use the
whip to frighten them away
from drinking.
>> But the results were
different than expected.
>> Humphry began to use that
treatment with his psychologist
at Weyburn.
And he said, we're
not getting this kind
of terrible experience.
But these guys, he said,
are beginning to enjoy.
It.
They like the experience.
And this began to happen
so frequently that he
said this is a new phenomena.
>> Can I come up for a minute?
>> Certainly, David.
>> Without realizing it, Hoffer
and Osmond had discovered
psychedelic therapy.
>> How are you making out?
>> That was magnificent.
>> The transcendental nature
of the LSD experience gave
alcoholics a clear view of
their motivations for drinking
and helped foster
self-understanding
and self-acceptance.
>> My feeling was that, in
this, that if you're looking
for paradise, that after this
experience you began to realize
that it's right here,
wherever you happen to be,
like where we're sitting.
>> During treatment sessions,
researchers began to take LSD
along with alcoholics.
This practice was perfected
by Duncan Blewett, who
found that between
doctor and patient
LSD created a powerful
empathetic bond.
>> Well supposing that somebody
said that more therapy could be
done with LSD in an afternoon
than could be done in 15 years
without it, what would
your response be,
especially if you
were a psychiatrist?
You had a material which
could produce humans who
really understood themselves.
>> The Saskatchewan group
worked with the most seriously
addicted.
Of 3,000 alcoholics
treated, approximately 50%
experienced recovery, a
remarkable rate of success when
compared to 20% for
Alcoholics Anonymous.
By the late 1950s,
psychotherapeutic reactions
to LSD were being explored
by research groups worldwide.
In Menlo Park, California, Myron
Stolaroff founded the Institute
for Psychedelic Research.
>> Most of us have so much stuff
to weigh in the unconscious,
what Carl Jung calls the shadow.
And the reason we stuff
it away is because it's
generally painful material
and we don't want to know it,
we don't want to experience it.
So what LSD does-- one of the
great things that it does,
it begins to dissolve
those barriers
and gives us access
to our unconscious.
>> Through his work, Stolaroff
off became associated with Al
Hubbard, one of the most
colorful personalities
in the history of LSD.
Hubbard, from the
backwoods of Kentucky,
had become an expert
in psychedelic drugs,
first taking LSD in 1951.
Known as Captain Trips, Hubbard
used his eccentric charm
to convince some of the
most influential people
on the planet to try LSD.
>> He had a lot of different
approaches in telling people,
like we're inside of a huge
barrel and there's only
a couple holes
where I see through.
Otherwise, we're
locked in this, and we
have no idea what the
world is really like
or what we're
really like, and LSD
allows you to
dissolve that barrier
and see the world
as it really which
is fantastic and enormous.
>> Although Hubbard's
methods were unorthodox,
he was associated with leading
cultural figures like Aldous
Huxley and with legitimate
researchers like Humphry
Osmond.
It was through Hubbard
that the Saskatchewan group
began to refine their
psychedelic method.
>> By this time, we were
treating large numbers
of alcoholic patients with LSD.
So we said to Al Hubbard, why
don't you come and show us
what you do.
We set aside a room.
We had psychologists,
the workers, and myself.
We had all the
controls we needed.
He brought in
pictures and music,
and we saw him work and
we liked what he did.
>> He knew more about
acid than anybody I knew,
than Humphry or Huxley
or anybody else.
It came naturally to him.
It was part of his persona.
I don't think LSD would
have been the same in Canada
without him.
It would have had a
different history.
>> In 1959, based on his
experiences with Hubbard,
Blewett co-wrote "The Handbook
for the Therapeutic Use
of LSD," still regarded as the
definitive guide of how to use
LSD in psychotherapy.
In 1956, Hoffer,
Osmond, and Blewett
took part in a peyote ceremony
near North Battlefield
with members of the
Native American church.
Peyote, the source
of mescaline, was
used in the church
as a sacrament
and as an expression of
cultural nationalism, which
the federal government
was trying to suppress.
The Saskatchewan group
attended the ceremony
to show that not everyone
was hostile to the aims
of the church.
Osmond published an
account of the experience
in the magazine "Tomorrow."
My colleagues and I had decided
that while they would watch
the ceremony, I
should take part in it
and observe from the inside.
Although I have used a variety
of mind-changing substances,
I had never taken peyote.
Peyote works slowly and subtly.
It is well-suited
for gatherings where
people who do not
share a common language
worship together
and explore reality
without the cushion of words.
We were experiencing something
that cannot be contained
by language.
Music or poetry come closer.
I was a stranger
whom they had allowed
to enter into their mystery.
I thanked them
for their kindness
and told them that I would
tell people about their worship
clearly and honestly.
In 1957, the
Saskatchewan group began
using LSD in a way that was
to have a lasting influence.
They began to explore
psychedelic-enhanced
creativity.
Some of the most famous
volunteers of the study
were members of a renowned group
of artists, the Regina Five.
But the most
influential work focused
on one of Humphry
Osmond's lifelong goals--
improving the design
of mental institutions.
>> We look forward to a day when
these great buildings will no
longer be needed to house
backlogs of long stay patients,
when small hospitals not more
than an hour's ride from home
will treat our patients and
give a decent measure of privacy
while they're in.
>> In Regina, Kiyo Izumi,
an MIT-trained architect,
had been commissioned to
design a new psychiatric center
in Yorkton.
In approaching the design
for a much smaller hospital,
Izumi became the first
architect to use LSD.
>> Well, actually, I took
it at the suggestion Dr.
Osmond who thought that it
might aid in my understanding
of the nature of the illness,
schizophrenia, and also,
in actual fact, experience some
of the perceptual distortions
that these people experienced.
>> Aware of how vast spaces
disorient schizophrenics,
Izumi created more intimate
settings with rooms that allow
for privacy and reflection.
One of four institutions
built by Izumi
after his LSD experience,
the Yorkton Hospital
won an award for
innovative design
from the American
Psychiatric Association.
The results of this
work, which Osborne
called socio-architecture,
were drawn on
by the National Institute
on Mental Health
in Washington, DC.
>> Through Humphry's influence,
they established the first
architectural psychology program
at the University of Utah.
It was a joint effort between
the psychology department
and the architecture department.
Then, at the City
University of New York,
they established the
environmental psychology
program and a big research
program in mental hospitals
there.
All that came from the
socio-architectural work.
>> By 1960, influential artists
and writers were experimenting
with LSD, including
William Burroughs,
mentor of the American
Beats, and Allen Ginsberg,
poet laureate of a
growing LSD subculture.
Harvard University
professor, Timothy Leary,
who was to become the
self-proclaimed high priest
of LSD, had his first
experience in 1962.
The growing awareness
of LSD would
have serious consequences for
Hoffer, Osmond, and Blewett.
In 1961, the political landscape
changed in Saskatchewan
when Tommy Douglas
left for Ottawa
to become leader of the
federal New Democrats.
One of the first to react to
the change was Humphry Osmond.
In June of 1961, Osmond
resigned his post at Weyburn
and moved to Princeton,
where he became
director of psychiatric research
for the state of New Jersey.
Losing Osmond was a major blow
to the Saskatchewan group,
especially for Abram Hoffer.
>> I was very
happy when he left.
If I had to have a fight--
if I had to defend myself
with someone at my
back, just the two of us
against the world, it
would be Humphry Osmond.
It was just at that
time in the early 1960s
that Hoffer was in for a fight.
The idea that psychedelics could
circumvent traditional therapy
was viewed with hostility
by mainstream psychiatry.
Reports about the
harmful effects of LSD
which were never substantiated
began to appear in the media.
>> That created a tremendous
amount of ill will
and hostility.
And I think this hostility
that was pervasive
carried on for a
long time afterwards.
They didn't really see
what we were trying to do.
We weren't trying to get the
whole world to take drugs.
In fact, we advised against it.
>> Dr. James Tyhurst, head of
psychiatry at the University
of British Columbia, was
one early critic of LSD.
>> If it is made
generally available,
it might become the
focus of cultist groups.
That is, in the same way as
the nitrous oxide used to be.
That is, it can be used to
have so-called experiences.
>> It's laughing gas
you're talking about.
>> Yes, that's
right, laughing gas.
And can have
experiences, as you know,
some people have written
on this and have actually
suggested that the experience
obtained from the lysurgic acid
has mystical religious values.
>> The federal government,
citing negative studies from
the medical community, reacted
to the growing controversy.
>> We're very concerned about
these hallucinogenic drugs,
especially LSD.
The medical evidence we have,
there is no doubt whatsoever
it causes physiological harm.
>> A bill now before
parliament would ban LSD,
restricting its use to research
purposes which are not clearly
defined.
During the past
week, some doctors
have expressed
anxieties over the bill.
They say proper LSD studies or
treatment could be interfered
with, but the government
could be limiting
the scope of medical research.
>> In an attempt to save a
decade of research now under
siege, Abram Hoffer became a
familiar figure in the national
media.
>> It is certainly possible
that LSD in some people can
precipitate a psychosis.
There are cases on record.
In my opinion, where
something like this
goes wrong, I tend to blame
the therapist more than I
do the drug, because
I think in many cases,
not in all, but
in many cases, it
has been given to
the wrong person.
>> What has gone wrong?
People have committed
suicide, have they not?
>> Yes, there have
been suicides reported.
Dr. Cohen reported a
study on 50,000 treatments
with 5 suicides.
This indicates to me that
LSD is as safe, if not safer,
than psychotherapy.
>> But Hoffer's point
of view was ignored.
Following the American lead,
the Canadian government in 1963
placed strict controls on
the use of LSD for research.
It was also more difficult to
obtain the drug from Sandoz,
the only legal supplier of LSD,
as the company was beginning
to fear for its reputation.
Across North America,
recreational use
of LSD from black market sources
was becoming more pronounced.
In 1963, LSD first
appeared on cubes of sugar.
During the first big
surge of street acid,
crude approximations of the
drug became widely available
on college campuses.
>> When I left the
government, I started working
for the university.
It was just at that
time when LSD began to--
it used to be a medical problem
and was a university problem.
>> At the University of Regina,
Duncan Blewett had been hired
to develop the
Department of Psychology.
With nearly 10 years
of experience with LSD,
Blewett's knowledge
was valued by students.
One student who
approached Blewett
was Simon de Jong, who later
became a member of parliament
and a candidate for the
leadership of the federal New
Democratic Party.
>> Very spontaneously, I went up
to him and I said, Dr. Blewett,
I would like to have
an experience with you.
I would like to
take LSD with you.
And Duncan at first was
somewhat taken aback and said,
well, OK, and I think at
that moment we arranged
for a time and a place.
>> With LSD use beginning
to permeate student life,
Blewett attempted to convince
the university to back formal
studies on LSD.
When they refused, he
remained an advocate
for personal experimentation.
>> I think at some stage
he says, well, then,
this is too big.
This has grown out of the
boundaries of universities
and university establishments
and the politics
within the university, that all
these petty things should not
be capable of dragging
down and stopping such
an important human invention.
>> But in the view
of Abram Hoffer,
Blewett was putting the
Saskatchewan group's reputation
at risk.
Hoffer expressed his
concerns in a letter
to Humphry Osmond
in June of 1963.
Saskatchewan is now
being held as a model
of how LSD can be used safely
in a controlled setting.
There is a feeling among LSD
groups in the United States
that we have saved LSD
research from extinction.
That is exactly
what we have tried
to point out to Duncan Blewett.
What had initially brought
the group together,
a belief in the incredible
potential of LSD,
was now pulling it apart.
>> I think you have to make a
distinction between research
and psychedelic exploration.
We were doing research.
Blewett and the others were
doing something different.
>> But that something
different was rapidly becoming
an international
cultural movement.
By 1964, it was a movement
that had found a leader.
>> This session tonight we're
going to use as the voyage
into your own body.
The human brain receives several
billion signals a minute.
Your brain is being flooded
with millions of coded messages
from all parts of your
body every second.
>> In 1963, Timothy Leary was
fired from Harvard University
for involving students in
experiments with psychedelic
drugs.
He resurfaced at Millbrook,
an estate in rural New York.
Leary used Millbrook
as a center from which
to spread his message
of LSD for all.
>> I frankly don't think
that the human being is ready
for LSD.
As a matter of fact, I
don't think the human
being is ready for fire.
But the trouble is, LSD
is here, and what are we
going to do about it?
Should we pass a
law against fire
and say only doctors
can have fire?
Should we pass a law
against LSD and say
only doctors can take
this trip, divine process,
go out of their minds,
use this in a microscope?
Of course, we can't,
because it's here,
and it's going to be used.
>> To those involved in
serious research with LSD,
Leary was turning their
enterprise into a party.
Psychologist
Stanley Krippner had
been a volunteer in Leary's
experiments at Harvard.
>> I disagreed with my friend
Timothy Leary who really wanted
it spread to the masses.
And I said, I'm not
an elitist, but I
think that these
drugs are best used
by a small number of people
in very tightly supervised
and controlled situations.
>> I never approved
of what he did.
In fact, Aldous
Huxley actually tried
to persuade him not to do it.
Aldous said, look,
this is dangerous.
You've got to be careful.
And he said, the doctors--
Dr. Osmond and Hoffer-- don't
think you should be doing.
He said, I don't care.
Neither one of those
guys know about LSD.
>> From Princeton, Humphry
Osmond joined the fight.
In a letter to
Leary, Osmond warned
against the
irresponsible use of LSD.
Your ventures have been
unnecessarily dangerous,
both for yourself
and your colleagues.
It is like flying
without a mechanic
to see that your
planes are safe.
No amount of brilliant
navigation and inspired courage
will make much difference if
there is just one loose screw.
Duncan Blewett did not share
Hoffer and Osmond's opinion
of Leary.
>> Much as one can
decry Leary's methods,
certainly they
have been effective
because, for instance, I saw
a cartoon in "Cavalier"--
I don't usually read it--
national magazine-- and
the young man standing
in the street is talking
to a police uniform
with a magnificent
sunflower on the head of it.
And he's saying, what?
Me, officer?
LSD, certainly not.
This kind of humor--
and the one in "Playboy"
where the young couple--
they're unrolling their
Christmas presents
and this young chap is
saying, good heavens, LSD,
and we only sent them pot.
[LAUGHTER]
I think this indicates
the extent to which people
that Leary was trying
to get in touch with
were gotten in touch with.
>> By 1966, LSD was given
blanket coverage in mainstream
media.
Much of the programming
was aimed at youth.
>> I'm wondering if you could
tell me just whether there is
a difference between
a black market LSD,
the bathtub variety, and
the types of things used
by yourself and others
in research experiments.
>> Yes, there is.
There is a major difference.
The pure LSD which we
obtained from Sandoz
was a known chemical, whereas
the black market LSD contains
only 10% of the original LSD.
In fact, it's possible that many
of these so-called bad trips
are due to the other
chemicals rather than
to the LSD which they contain.
>> Bad trips experienced
as extreme fear, panic,
and even temporary psychosis
were now a common occurrence.
The value of LSD as an agent
for gaining self-understanding
and exploring higher states of
consciousness was being lost.
>> Medical doctors say you're
liable to go psychotic.
>> Oh, really?
You know, I really think
this is a funny thing,
but if all the people
that took acid--
you know, the people that I
know that have taken acid,
we can look out at the other
people that haven't and they
can tell us we're crazy.
And we can say, well, you
haven't seen anything yet.
>> LSD was kindling a revolution
among the young of the West.
Controlled research
using the drug
was about to be overtaken by
massive social and political
forces.
By the mid 1960s,
the war in Vietnam
was being protested
by millions worldwide.
>> There was a tie in in
the United States between
the anti-war Vietnam
War movement and the use
of psychedelics.
The politicians
were saying, what
is happening to
these young people?
They're taking these drugs,
and they're becoming radicals.
They're trying to get our
troops out of Vietnam.
Heaven only knows
what will happen
if we don't put the lid on LSD.
>> They no longer believed what
their government was saying.
This is unique.
There aren't many
situations in human history
where once a country is at
war, and the drums of war
are sounding, that the
patriotic duty of the citizen
is to rally around the flag
and my country, right or wrong,
but my country--
well, that didn't happen.
>> Madness and anarchy confirmed
the establishment view that LSD
was ravaging an entire
generation of youth.
>> I've known two people who
killed themself under LSD.
>> You're right out of control.
>> Are there acid parties going
on in this city right now?
>> Yes, yes, at
this very second.
>> Abram Hoffer, knowing it
was just a matter of time until
the door slammed shut on LSD,
proposed a radical solution
to rampant street use.
>> I don't see why any reputable
person who wishes to explore it
couldn't do so with the help
of a physician who could stand
by in case you get
into difficulty.
Wouldn't it be healthier then
to try and arrange places
under proper supervision
where this could be done?
Now I admit that it's not
going to happen tomorrow,
maybe never, but I
think it would be better
to try and achieve these
places than it would merit
you to go out and
play with what you
can get on the black market.
>> But it was too late.
The backlash by society
growing terrified of drugs
was prevailing.
In March of 1966, Us
President Lyndon Johnson
made possession of LSD a felony.
In Canada, beginning
in the same year,
a series of events
involving LSD were
sensationalized by the media.
In November of 1966, on the
news magazine program "W5,"
actress Pamela Hyatt was shown
undergoing therapy with LSD.
>> A moment ago you
were saying you're ugly.
You weren't pretty enough,
pretty enough for father
to love you.
>> Yes.
>> Pretty enough for
anybody else to love you.
>> Yes.
I never felt I was.
>> On a Sunday night, Hyatt's
intense emotional experience
was broadcast into millions
of homes nationwide,
resulting in a
huge public outcry.
In February of 1967, opposition
leader John Diefenbaker
brought the "W5"
program to the attention
of the House of Commons.
To Diefenbaker, the broadcast
was a flagrant exploitation
and encouragement of crime, and
called for government action.
In March of 1967, the
LSD-related suicide
of a young man from Toronto
was carried by newspapers
across the country.
One month later,
on April 23, 1967,
the Canadian
government introduced
a bill that banned LSD.
All research projects by
the Saskatchewan group
were immediately abandoned.
Although Hoffer,
Osmond, and Blewett
were divided on how LSD
should be controlled,
they were united in their
belief that the government
ban on research was
unfounded and misguided.
Had it been possible
to avoid mass hysteria
and to continue
responsible research,
one of the most
important opportunities
in the history of psychiatry
would not have been lost.
>> I think, to the individual,
if it's done properly,
they develop insight into
their own personality.
They develop insight
to their own problems.
And they become more tolerant
of other people's experiences.
And they might even
be more productive.
They might be more creative.
For society at large, I think
we could always use ideas.
I think the more
we can encourage
people to have useful ideas,
the better off we are.
>> There are a lot of people in
various places in society now
who know that psychedelia is
not necessarily altogether
damaging, that it, in fact,
changed the face of society,
stopped the war in Vietnam,
prevented nuclear war,
and had many, many
other effects,
one of which is now
evident everywhere.
It made people
question authority.
>> We have evidence that
psychedelics, properly used,
can increase communication and
understanding between those who
take them.
This has not yet been proved,
and proof is not easy.
We have to recognize that
we are dealing with aspects
of the human mind
that are even more
elusive and mysterious than
the depths of space and time--
Humphry Osmond.